Recipe to reproduce the 2014 KNMI Climate Scenarios (kcs). (#1667)
ESMValGroup/ESMValTool: doc/sphinx/source/recipes/recipe_kcs.rst

.. _recipe_kcs:

> KNMI Climate Scenarios

Reviewer: Add year 2014 to the title. The method in 2006 was different, and likely adaptations will be made in 2023.

======================

Description
-----------

This recipe implements the method described in `Lenderink et al., 2014 <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/9/11/115008>`_, to prepare the 2014 KNMI Climate Scenarios (KCS) for the Netherlands. A set of 8 global climate projections from EC-Earth were downscaled with the RACMO regional climate model. Since the EC-Earth ensemble is not readily representative for the spread in the full CMIP ensemble, this method recombines 5-year segments from the EC-Earth ensemble to obtain a large suite of "resamples". Subsequently, 8 new resamples are selected that cover the spread in CMIP much better than the original set.

The original method created 16 resampled datasets:

* 2 main scenarios: Moderate (M) and Warm (W) (Lenderink 2014 uses "G" instead of "M").
* 2 'sub'scenarios: Relatively high (H) or low (L) changes in seasonal temperature and precipitation
* 2 time horizons: Mid-century (MOC; 2050) and end-of-century (EOC; 2085)

> * 2 periods: Control (1981-2010) and future (variable)

Reviewer: To be consistent with the paper and the paragraph above, I would say there are 8 resampled datasets. The 2 periods you mention form one resampled dataset from which changes are computed.

> The configuration settings for these scenarios can be found in table 1 of Lenderink 2014's `supplementary data <https://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/9/11/115008/media/erl503687suppdata.pdf>`_.

Reviewer: The settings are for the resamples, not the scenarios.

Implementation
--------------

> The implementation is such that application to other datasets, regions, etc. is relatively straightforward. The description below focuses on the reference use case of Lenderink et al., 2014, where the target model was EC-Earth. An external set of EC-Earth data was used, for which 3D fields were available as well. In the recipe shipped with ESMValTool, however, the target model is CCSM4, so that it works out of the box with ESGF data only.

Reviewer: Add why we need 3D data: "for which 3D fields for downscaling were available as well."

> The implementation is such that application to other datasets, regions, etc. is relatively straightforward. The description below focuses on the reference use case of Lenderink et al., 2014, where the target model was EC-Earth. An external set of EC-Earth data (all RCP85) was used, for which 3D fields fow downscaling were available as well. In the recipe shipped with ESMValTool, however, the target model is CCSM4, so that it works out of the box with ESGF data only.

Author: Yep, it was a typo. Thanks for spotting.

In the first diagnostic, the spread of the full CMIP ensemble is used to obtain 4 values of a *global* :math:`{\Delta}T_{CMIP}`, corresponding to the 10th and 90th percentiles for the M and W scenarios, respectively, for both MOC and EOC. Subsequently, for each of these 4 *steering parameters*, 30-year periods are selected from the target model ensemble, where :math:`{\Delta}T_{target}{\approx}{\Delta}T_{CMIP}`.

> In the second diagnostic, for both the control and future periods, the 8 target model ensemble members are split into 6 segments of 5 years each. Out of all :math:`8^6` possible re-combinations of these 5-year segments, eventually 8 new 'resamples' are selected based on *local* changes in seasonal temperature and precipitation. This is done in the following steps:

Reviewer: In the ESMValTool implementation, with CCSM4, are there also 8 target model ensemble members? If not, this might be confusing.. then you might want to add 'N target model ensemble members', which would still allow to say "N^6 possible re-combinations".

> 1. Select 1000 samples for the control period, and 2 x 1000 samples for the future period (one for each subscenario). Step 1 poses a constraint on winter precipitation. For the control period, winter precipitation must still closely represent the average of the original ensemble. For the two future periods, the change in winter precipitation with respect to the control period must approximately equal :math:`4{\Delta}T` % (subscenario L) or  :math:`8{\Delta}T` % (subscenario H).

Reviewer: The current way of writing is not immediately clear to me, maybe just state "4% per degree DeltaT"

3. Use a Monte-Carlo method to make a final selection of 8 resamples with minimal reuse of the same ensemble member/segment.

Available recipes and diagnostics
---------------------------------

Recipes are stored in recipes/

- recipe_kcs.yml

Diagnostics are stored in diag_scripts/kcs/

- global_matching.py
- local_resampling.py

.. note::
    We highly recommend using the options described in :ref:`rerunning`. The speed bottleneck for the first diagnostic is the preprocessor. In the second diagnostic, step 1 is most time consuming, whereas steps 2 and 3 are likely to be repeated several times. Therefore, intermediate files are saved after step 1, and the diagnostic will automatically detect and use them if the ``-i`` flag is used.

> User settings

Author: Done!

Diagnostics:

* global_matching

  * ``scenario_years``: a list of time horizons. Default: ``[2050, 2085]``
  * ``scenario_percentiles``: a list of percentiles for the steering table. Default: ``[p10, p90]``

* local_resampling

  * ``control_period``: the control period shared between all scenarios. Default: ``[1981, 2010]``
  * ``n_samples``: the final number of recombinations to be selected. Default: ``8``
  * ``scenarios``: a scenario name and list of options. The default setting is a single scenario:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        scenarios:
          ML_MOC:  # scenario name; can be chosen by the user
            description: "Moderate / low changes in seasonal temperature & precipitation"
            global_dT: 1.0
            scenario_year: 2050
            resampling_period: [2021, 2050]
            dpr_winter: 4
            pr_summer_control: [25, 55]
            pr_summer_future: [45, 75]
            tas_winter_control: [50, 80]
            tas_winter_future: [20, 50]
            tas_summer_control: [0, 100]
            tas_summer_future: [0, 50]

>     These values are taken from table 1 in the Lenderink 2014's supplementary material. Multiple scenarios can be processed at once by appending more configurations below the default one. For new applications, ``global_dT``, ``resampling_period`` and ``dpr_winter`` are informed by the output of the first diagnostic. The percentile bounds are to be tuned until a satisfactory selection is achieved.

Reviewer: Maybe for the last sentence: "The percentile bounds in the scenario settings (e.g. tas_winter_control and tas_winter_future) are to be tuned until a satisfactory scenario spread over the full CMIP ensemble is achieved."

Example output
--------------

The diagnostic ``global_matching`` produces a scenarios table like the one below

.. code-block:: python

       year percentile  cmip_dt period_bounds  target_dt  pattern_scaling_factor
    0  2050        P10     0.98  [2019, 2048]       0.99                    1.00
    1  2050        P90     2.01  [2045, 2074]       2.02                    0.99
    2  2085        P10     1.38  [2030, 2059]       1.38                    1.00
    3  2085        P90     3.89  [2071, 2100]       3.28                    1.18

which is printed to the log file and also saved as a csv-file ``scenarios.csv``.
Additionally, a figure is created showing the CMIP spread in global temperature change,
AND highlighting the selected steering parameters and resampling periods:

.. _fig_kcs_global_matching:

> .. figure::  /recipes/figures/kcs/global_matching.png

Reviewer: Important that this figure is correct, in my version (pdf) two changes are needed still (maybe these already happened?):
- target model, only 1 RCP scenario can be used at the same time, otherwise period selection does not make sense.
- resampling periods do not yet make sense (beyond 2100).

Author: That has been fixed. I can help you make a local build to preview the documentation.

     Combination 3          1         4         7         2         3         6         5         3         1         7         4         1
     Combination 4          5         7         6         3         1         3         2         3         0         6         1         7
     Combination 5          7         2         1         4         5         1         6         0         4         2         3         3
     Combination 6          7         2         2         0         6         6         5         2         1         5         4         2
     Combination 7          6         3         2         1         6         1         2         1         0         2         1         3

* Provenance information: bibtex, xml, and/or text files containing citation information are stored alongside the final result and the final figure.
  The final combinations only derive from the target model data, whereas the figure also uses CMIP data.
* A figure used to validate the final result, reproducing figures 5 and 6 from Lenderink et al.:

.. _fig_kcs_local_validation:

> .. figure::  /recipes/figures/kcs/local_validation_2085.png

Reviewer: WH temperature scenarios do not yet make sense in my version of the figure, should be at the top of the CMIP range.

.. _recipe_kcs:

KNMI Climate Scenarios
======================

Description
-----------

This recipe implements the method described in `Lenderink et al., 2014 <https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/9/11/115008>`_, to prepare the 2014 KNMI Climate Scenarios (KCS) for the Netherlands. A set of 8 global climate projections from EC-Earth were downscaled with the RACMO regional climate model. Since the EC-Earth ensemble is not readily representative for the spread in the full CMIP ensemble, this method recombines 5-year segments from the EC-Earth ensemble to obtain a large suite of "resamples". Subsequently, 8 new resamples are selected that cover the spread in CMIP much better than the original set.

The original method created 16 resampled datasets:

* 2 main scenarios: Moderate (M) and Warm (W) (Lenderink 2014 uses "G" instead of "M").
* 2 'sub'scenarios: Relatively high (H) or low (L) changes in seasonal temperature and precipitation
* 2 time horizons: Mid-century (MOC; 2050) and end-of-century (EOC; 2085)
* 2 periods: Control (1981-2010) and future (variable)

> The configuration settings for these scenarios can be found in table 1 of Lenderink 2014's supplement.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The configuration settings for these scenarios can be found in table 1 of Lenderink 2014's `supplementary data` <https://iopscience.iop.org/1748-9326/9/11/115008/media/erl503687suppdata.pdf>.
```

Implementation
--------------

The implementation is such that application to other datasets, regions, etc. is relatively straightforward. However, the description below focuses on the reference use case of Lenderink et al., 2014, where the target model is EC-Earth.

In the first diagnostic, the spread of the full CMIP ensemble is used to obtain 4 values of a *global* :math:`{\Delta}T_{CMIP}`, corresponding to the 10th and 90th percentiles for the M and W scenarios, respectively, for both MOC and EOC. Subsequently, for each of these 4 *steering parameters*, 30-year periods are selected from the EC-Earth ensemble, where :math:`{\Delta}T_{ECEarth}{\approx}{\Delta}T_{CMIP}`.

> In the second diagnostic, for for both the control and future periods, the 8 EC-Earth ensemble members are split into 6 segments of 5 years each. Out of all :math:`8^6` possible re-combinations of these 5-year segments, eventually 8 new 'resamples' are selected based on *local* changes in seasonal temperature and precipitation. This is done in the following steps:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the second diagnostic, for both the control and future periods, the 8 EC-Earth ensemble members are split into 6 segments of 5 years each. Out of all :math:`8^6` possible re-combinations of these 5-year segments, eventually 8 new 'resamples' are selected based on *local* changes in seasonal temperature and precipitation. This is done in the following steps:
```

1. Select 1000 samples for the control period, and 2 x 1000 samples for the future period (one for each subscenario). Step 1 poses a constraint on winter precipitation. For the control period, winter precipitation must still closely represent the average of the original ensemble. For the two future periods, the change in winter precipitation with respect to the control period must approximately equal :math:`4{\Delta}T` % (subscenario L) or  :math:`8{\Delta}T` % (subscenario H).

> 2. Further constrain the selection by picking samples that represent either high or low changes in summer precipitation and summer and winter temperature, by limiting the remaining samples to certain percentile ranges: relatively wet/cold in the control and dry/warm in the future, or vice versa. The percentile ranges are listed in table 1 of Lenderink 2014's supplement. This should result is approximately 50 remaining samples for each scenario, for both control and future.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2. Further constrain the selection by picking samples that represent either high or low changes in summer precipitation and summer and winter temperature. To do so, the selection is done by limiting the remaining samples to certain percentile ranges: relatively wet/cold in the control and dry/warm in the future, or vice versa. The percentile ranges are listed in table 1 of Lenderink 2014's supplement. This should result is approximately 50 remaining samples for each scenario, for both control and future.
```

Author: I prefer the shorter version.

> 3. Use a monte-carlo method to make a final selection of 8 resamples with minimal reuse of the same ensemble member/segment.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
3. Use a Monte-Carlo method to make a final selection of 8 resamples with minimal reuse of the same ensemble member/segment.
```

> .. note::

Reviewer 2: the section "Available recipes and diagnostics" might be a better place to have this note.

Author: I'll look into that.

Author: Done

    We highly recommend using the options described in :ref:`rerunning`. The speed bottleneck for the first diagnostic is the preprocessor. In the second diagnostic, step 1 is most time consuming, whereas steps 2 and 3 are likely to be repeated several times. Therefore, intermediate files are saved after step 1, and the diagnostic will automatically detect and use them if the :code:`-i` flag is used.

Available recipes and diagnostics
---------------------------------

Recipes are stored in recipes/

- recipe_kcs.yml

Diagnostics are stored in diag_scripts/kcs/

- global_matching.py
- local_resampling.py

User settings
-------------

> Datasets: Datasets have been split in two parts, such that the CMIP ensemble and the target model datasets can be treated separately. The recipe can work with a target model that is not part of CMIP. In that case the target model data should be stored alongside the CMIP data in the exact same format. One use case for this recipe is to compare between CMIP5 and CMIP6.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Datasets: Datasets have been split in two parts: the CMIP datasets and the target model datasets. So, the recipe can work with a target model that is not part of CMIP. In that case the target model data should be stored alongside the CMIP data in the exact same format. One use case for this recipe is to compare between CMIP5 and CMIP6.
```

> Preprocessors: We've tried to use built-in preprocessor functions as much as possible. The first diagnostic requires global mean temperature anomalies for each dataset, both CMIP and the target model, and some multimodel statistics. The second diagnostic requires focuses on a point in the Netherlands. The :code:`extract_point` preprocessor can be changed to :code:`extract_shape` or :code:`extract_region`, in conjunction with an area mean. And of course, the coordinates can be changed to analyze a different region.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Preprocessors: We've tried to use built-in preprocessor functions as much as possible. The first diagnostic requires global mean temperature anomalies for each dataset, both CMIP and the target model, and some multimodel statistics. The second diagnostic requires data on a point in the Netherlands. However, the :code:`extract_point` preprocessor can be changed to :code:`extract_shape` or :code:`extract_region`, in conjunction with an area mean. And of course, the coordinates can be changed to analyze a different region.
```

Diagnostics:

* global_matching

  * :code:`scenario_years`: a list of time horizons. Default: :code:`[2050, 2085]`
  * :code:`scenario_percentiles`: a list of percentiles for the steering table. Default: :code:`[p10, p90]`

>   * :code:`target_model`: the name of the target model. Default: :code:`EC-Earth`

Reviewer 2: shall we change the default EC-Earth to CCSM4, because the plots show the results for CCSM4?

Author: Hmm. Maybe I was hoping to fix the EC-Earth data that are part of CMIP5, so we can use that instead.

Author: I added a comment about the target model. We cannot just change it without the comment, because all the values have been tuned to ec-earth. So I think, without a good EC-Earth CMIP5 entry, we cannot do better than this.

* local_resampling

  * :code:`target_model`: the name of the target model. Default: :code:`EC-Earth`
  * :code:`scenarios`: a scenario name and list of options. The default setting is a single scenario:

    .. code-block:: yaml

        scenarios:
          ML_MOC:
            description: "Moderate / low changes in seasonal temperature & precipitation"
            global_dT: 1.0
            scenario_year: 2050
            resampling_period: [2021, 2050]
            dpr_winter: 4
            pr_summer_control: [25, 55]
            pr_summer_future: [45, 75]
            tas_winter_control: [50, 80]
            tas_winter_future: [20, 50]
            tas_summer_control: [0, 100]
            tas_summer_future: [0, 50]

>     These values are taken from table 1 in the Lenderink 2014's supplement. For new applications, :code:`global_dT`, :code:`resampling_period` and :code:`dpr_winter` are informed by the output of the first diagnostic. The percentile bounds are to be tuned until a satisfactory selection is achieved. Multiple scenarios can be processed at once by appending more configurations below the default one.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    These values are taken from table 1 in the Lenderink 2014's supplementary material. Multiple scenarios can be processed at once by appending more configurations below the default one. For new applications, :code:`global_dT`, :code:`resampling_period` and :code:`dpr_winter` are informed by the output of the first diagnostic. The percentile bounds are to be tuned until a satisfactory selection is achieved.
```

Example output
--------------

> The diagnostic :code:`global matching` produces a scenarios table like the one below

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The diagnostic :code:`global_matching` produces a scenarios table like the one below
```

.. code-block:: python

       year percentile  cmip_dt period_bounds  target_dt  pattern_scaling_factor
    0  2050       Mean     1.45  [2039, 2068]       1.44                    1.01
    1  2050     Median     1.41  [2038, 2067]       1.41                    1.00
    2  2085       Mean     2.44  [2073, 2102]       2.44                    1.00
    3  2085     Median     2.28  [2067, 2096]       2.29                    1.00

which is printed to the log file and also saved as a csv-file :code:`scenarios.csv`.
Additionally, a figure is created showing the CMIP spread in global temperature change,
AND highlighting the selected steering parameters and resampling periods:

.. _fig_kcs_global_matching:
.. figure::  /recipes/figures/kcs/global_matching.png
   :align:   center

The diagnostic :code:`local_resampling` procudes a number of output files:

* :code:`season_means_<scenario>.nc`: intermediate results, containing the season means for each segment of the original target model ensemble.
* :code:`top1000_<scenario>.csv`: intermediate results, containing the 1000 combinations that have been selected based on winter mean precipitation.

> * :code:`indices_<scenario>.csv`: final resuls, showing the final set of resamples as a table:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* :code:`indices_<scenario>.csv`: showing the final set of resamples as a table:
```
